OK, so before I start,
I mean it's my tradition?
Uh, please send me some feedback,
emoji, icons and etc just
to let me know that I mean.
you have the focus of the course.
To the lecture.
Oh, that's a good thing, Monica.
Thank you, Kaden, Nissam.
Why? Why not happy? Thank you Luca Zaina.
Thank you, OK, then try then. Josh.
I totally understand. As I said,
I mean at the time I was a student,
I never make my morning classes.
OK, thank you Arnish.
Thank you Danielle.
We have 57 student in the class but I
think I received just about 20 emojis.
Oh my God, this Trident 4:00 AM.
That's yeah.
So wake up others other students.
So we are waiting for you.
Thank you, Quinn. Thank you Luca.
OK, so I'm not gonna count these emojis,
but it's still I feel like it's
not more than failure for you.
So let's just start.
Basically again, this is a a movie
recommendation for this weekend of yours.
I mean, it's in series of movie.
The Bourne Ultimatum, I mean,
uh, it's a Bourne movie series.
The 1st edition was born identity,
which was a bad.
It's basically about its CIA, cat.
I mean assassinated.
Will have some problem with
memory and identity and etc.
So I watched the first.
Movie and it was brilliant.
So I really suggest you to watch this movie.
But the main reason that we put this movie
is this name Bourne and also it's a kind of a.
Pawn name for, I mean born, I mean.
This were all kind of in giving birth.
So we'll see why, uh,
these names are related to today's lecture.
So just as a reminder for this week's lab,
or you can already see the labs
on this ad and these addresses.
Uh, if you go to the lab this section,
it's a lab about what are the Assembly
languages and what are the opcodes and etc.
So I hope that you like this
lab doing this lab and etc.
Next Wednesday is the deadline for this lab.
Also, the lecture assignments.
You can find it at this address
in the lecture part.
At this folder you can see the lecture
assignments free. It's a PDF file.
And so now we already said that.
Uh.
It's time to, uh, I mean uh,
learn or explain details of an
operating system we installed with
the easy part of an operating system,
which is the shell.
We said that the main purpose of
the shell is to put the strap your
program inside the memory with the
help of Colonel and make it a process.
However,
we said that before running your program,
you may need to know about
the computer system status,
meaning that whether there are other
programs available on your computer system.
Are there other files whether
the size of the files?
Are there any hidden files,
whether the memory and space
available space or free space,
or whether your hard disk drive
has available space and etc.
So we said that before putting these
questions to that operating system,
we have to see.
Who knows the answer to these questions?
Either there we already know,
or we ask an Oracle,
or God knows everything,
or as a programmer you know
the answers or the shell knows
Colonel knows or processing,
and we already last lecture.
We said that Colonel is the only
program that knows the answer to
all these questions because kernels
when it could distract the memory,
it keeps control of the whole
computer system and knows everything.
For instance,
everything about the fires the fire
system part of the current news about that,
everything about the memory,
the memory manager,
part of the current knows about that and etc.
So once I see if you want to
see what are the available
devices on your computer system,
the device manager part of
the kernel knows the answer.
So everything goes to the kernel.
So now that we know from who
we have to ask our questions,
the next is how we can ask the question.
So either we can Simply put in our
question it normal English language,
the modern operating systems
are doing like this.
Uh, which for the Unix and Unix
like or unique space numbering
system is not the case,
or you have to write your question
in OP codes and we said that it's
very challenging to write programs in
opcodes and then make it run out of it.
And the best way is right.
Your question in C program.
Give it to the compiler.
Make it as an assembly lines
and give it to the assembler and
make it OP code and then.
Ask the shell to bootstrap your
question as a program inside the memory.
Then you can know the answer from the kernel,
so we usually do this,
but you are free to do this as well,
and this is kind of high level so
we don't use this type of language
to ask a question from the kernel.
So. We said that, for instance,
if you want to know the list of
files in your computer system
in your hard disk drive,
you have to write a C program,
compile it into opcodes,
and then when it's ready to run.
So you ask the shell to bootstrap
this program.
This specific program,
and then the shell ask the kernel to
load your program inside the memory.
And then your program,
which contains the question to list
the files of your computer system,
make it a process,
attach an ID it attached some opcodes
beginning of your process and the end,
the epilogue,
and the sorry,
the prologue and the envelope
part of the process and then.
It gives the controller processor
to your process and then by
running your opcode you can do
this system call to the kernel.
For this case I mean listing the
files off the computer system.
Basically you do a system called
to the file system part of the
Colonel and the Colonel fetches the
list of files and brings back the
list of files to your process and
then you can simply print out the
files or set or whatever you want.
A to do with the answer to your question.
So I already showed you a sample
implementation of this program.
It's called LS or list in C.
So I just wanted to show you
again this sample which is a.
Here so. Missing little bit.
Ah, I hope you already had a look at this.
In addition, there is some important
information at the beginning of the program.
These are those commented lines.
Basically, it says that it's a free software.
So we already said that
when we say free software,
we don't mean you can have it
for free without paying money.
It means that you are allowed to
change this code in any way you like,
and also you're allowed to release it.
And as long as you follow the same license.
So you can have your own or version of
the list listing files or LS without any
permission from the author of this code.
So as you can see here,
you can modify it under the terms
of the general new project you
see a new general public license.
An interesting line is this.
This code is actually written by
Richard the stove and you see
how old is this program is.
So it's in 1991 something you can see.
There are new versions or new
addition or versions of this point,
but originally it was written by
Richard Stallman and David McKenzie,
and we said that Richard someone was
the founder of the group project.
The idea of open source community,
or I mean, free software.
So anyways,
we said that in order to just
return a simple C program to list
the files of the computer system
as a system called the kernel,
you have to write these huge lines of code.
Actually,
there's a complete code you can
write it much more simpler code,
but it has a lot of options or a lot
of different ways to show you the
folders and files in the computer system.
But at the end of the day,
we can say that a complete list program,
I mean, listing the files,
is about 5000 files.
So you have to either use it,
change it,
or you have to write your own program,
compile it,
make it a opcode,
and then ask the shell to run
this program to just answer
a question from the kernel.
So let's minimize this.
So we have a two questions and
also Michelle has a question.
Wait a second.
So let's go with behavior purposeful.
Understand what does it mean by
free software. Uh, last lecture.
We said that, uh,
what is the difference between free
product versus free beer and also
free software so I could refer you to,
uh, the last lecture. Uh,
which when a new project was the I mean, the.
Uh, initial establishment.
About what does it mean when
you say free software,
we said that free software,
it means that it's like
freedom or free speech,
meaning that you can have the software.
You can change the software based
on whatever you like and then you
can release that software as an.
I mean, as an author of that software.
So it's called a free software.
It's a question in the lecture
assignment as well, yeah?
Uh, Victor asked.
You're free to creatively modify as it is,
you see, yes, yes, Victor,
that's a question.
That's the answer to behavior
question as well.
So we have a question from Michelle
so you can enable your mic and ask
your question shell. Uh, never mind.
Actually I'm I'm good oh.
So yeah, let's continue.
So one thing is that it's very
hard for programmers to write.
A C program for any question that
they want to ask from the kernel.
So these questions are not the
main purpose of the programmers,
they just wanted to know the
status of the computer system.
However, for any of these questions,
they have to write a program and
then compile it with this tablet
with the shell to the pro and
make it process and attach it.
So it's a huge burden on programmers.
So another way that the operating
system can help the programmers
to ask this question is.
Deliver these are questions or the
programs or the opcodes of these
questions as a library routine.
So this is another way they can
release it as a library routine and
then programmers can link to these
library routines aesthetically.
Like this,
so basically they can deliver the
OP code of the list file program as
library routine and then in your
program you don't write the list part,
you just write this simple,
see lines to call the functions
of this library routine.
Either aesthetically you can link
it by the linker of the C compiler
and then you can ask the shell
to bootstrap this whole program.
And they shall put the straps your
program by request into the caramel.
So this is,
your program becomes a process inside.
Your process you already linked
to the library routine LS,
and basically when the processor gets in,
I mean, uh,
it gets to the point that it
wants to run the upgrade of the
this part of your process.
It reaches the LS part.
The LS prod.
Does this system called the Colonel,
and the Colonel returns
the result to the LS part
and then your process have the result
and you can continue with your process.
So basically, you don't write
a C program or the opcode.
You don't have the op code of
the list program. You basically.
Have it as a library routine as
part of the operating system.
You just simply write the save
file and add the header to the
library routine and then call
the function and then you compile
it or link it aesthetically.
So, or you can use these questions
or this code as dynamic linking,
meaning that I mean you would just
simply write a simple lines of C code.
You run your process by the help
of shell and then at some point
you call the function from the
library routine LS by dynamically.
So when you reach that point you called
the kernel or system called to load
the library routine for LS program.
The kernel loads the LS part at any
available space in memory and then
gives back to control to your process.
Then your process means a call
to the LS program.
One thing is that this
is not a system called.
This is just a normal call of
a process to another process.
So it make a call to the LS,
and the LS makes a system called the kernel.
The kernel provides the list of
files to the LS and the LS returns
the result frontier process.
So that's the way the static dynamic
link to a library routine works.
But the special thing here is that the
library the library routine is up for.
Providing some answer to
some specific questions,
in this case list of the files.
So, but you can see that these questions
are very frequent at any point in your
work when you are dealing with the kernel,
you need to know what are the available
files or what are the available space
of your computer system and etc.
So again, it's still,
although it's much more better than write
the whole program yourself using the library.
Teen is still has a burden. You have
to at least write a C program to call.
Uh, that library routine. So.
Is it possible to remove that part?
Is it possible to not asking the programmer
to write a program to ask the question?
The answer is yes,
the operating system provides more
help to the programmers and basically
they deliver these library routines
not as a library routines but
at the part of the shell.
So basically they already linked these
questions or these programs inside the shell.
So there is no need for you to write another
program to call these library routines.
It's just have the shelf because you have
the shell you already have these questions
or these programs inside the shell,
so modern operating system delivers.
These are questions,
or these programs as a part of the shelf they
already linked these programs into the shell.
Weather statically they already did that.
So, uh,
if they already aesthetically linked
these programs as a part of Shell.
So when the shell is bootstrap
inside the memory,
it already has these programs
inside the shell,
the only thing is for you is that
just type the name of that question
or the name of that program.
For instance here the name of the
program to reach the file is LS.
You have to simply type the name
of that program and the shell.
Knows where is that program
inside the shell is and it, uh,
I mean goes to this part of the shell
and runs the opcodes of that program.
So.
Basically,
uh,
either statically or the shell may have
the these programs as a dynamic linking.
So the way it works is like this.
So basically the shell bootstraps inside
the memory or without these programs,
whenever you.
Once you put the name of these
programs and give it to the shell,
the shell dynamically loads that part
of the program that does the listing
and does the system called the kernel.
And so basically at runtime,
when you put this name to the shell,
the shell ask the kernel to lose
the this program and the kernel
loads this program inside the memory
and then so this is the first one,
second one and then the kernel
brings back the control to the shell,
the third part and then the shell
calls the LS.
Program and the LS again does
a system called the kernel.
And the Colonel brings the.
List of files and then the LS1.
Have the list of files brings
the result to the shell.
So this is this dynamic call of
the LS program with the shell.
The only thing you have to see is
that you just put the name of the
program and give it to the shell.
You don't know what happens
behind the scenes,
whether it is called aesthetically
or whether it is called dynamically
because the operating system who
ships or delivers the shell and
the kernel knows how to incorporate
these programs inside the shop.
But it's an interesting question for you.
If you want to see, for instance, Linux,
have the LS as part of the shell,
is statically or dynamically.
It's a good research topic for you.
But at the end of the day,
for us as a programmer or system
program at this course we have to just
Simply put the name of that program LS.
And then when you put that,
it basically gives you the result.
For instance,
if you Simply put the LS at,
press enter,
enter so you see the list of
files or folders in the correct
folder in your home folder.
If you put an option forward slash,
meaning that order the list of
files in the root of this system,
these are the files and the
folders or directories in the
root of their computer system.
If you want to see what are
the files or folders in this
path of the computer system,
you have to simply say that list.
The file or folder of this path and
then it gives you the list of all
the folders or files in this path.
So this is very convenient for us.
We don't have to write a simple
line of C program for doing
the list of files or folders.
We don't have to write a single program
to call the library routines for LS.
The only thing we have to do
is just write the name of that
program and the shell,
whether it's statically or dynamically
load that part of the program
and brings the result for us.
So not only just this, uh?
Program list with basically
meaning that listing the files
but also it has a lot of other
programs that provides answers to
different questions of a programmer.
So all these sets of programs
delivered by the shell of an
operating system is called builtins.
So again, Shell has the main important task.
Bootstrap your program.
The second important task of the
shell is to provide you these
builtins or built-in programs.
So by using the built in programs you
can have the answer all your questions.
So not only you can ask questions,
but also you can command the kernel
to do something for you. For instance,
we can ask the kernel to delete a file.
You can ask the kernel to remove a
folder and all its called content.
It can ask a file to become a hidden file,
or you can ask to move a file from
one location to another or copy a file
from one location to another location.
So these are commands, not questions,
but you can think of these questions
as commands because you can simply
say that give me. The answer.
Of question one,
so we can think of questions as commands,
so then you can consider all of
these questionable commands as
single set of commands.
So as a result,
shell builtins becoms commands.
So now instead of saying that
you have to write the name of
that program or that question,
you have to simply say that you
have to put the commands for that.
So instead of just the name of the program,
you can say that the command name.
And gradually after.
Uh, I mean within the history,
the shell because of these sets of
built-in programs or built-in commands,
it changes the name from the
shell to command line.
Now you see why we call the command
line in the shell of a Unix.
That's the history.
That's the reason that why we
called the Shell command line.
Out there,
most of the I mean people called called
Command Line because they know you can put.
They can put the commands and ask
the shell to provide the answer.
Now as a computer scientist you
know why we call it command line.
Sometimes it can call it command
prompt but do not forget about
the main task of the shell.
The main task of the shell
is still with the strap,
your program, the commands or just.
This side or any convenient part of
the shell to help the programmers.
That's why I mean gradually the
side part of the shell becomes
the main part of the shell.
So we had a question here.
Nicholas asks, do you know if LS is
referencing an index file or is it
in actively checking the? Oh yeah,
that's a good question from Nicholas.
So specifically about the LS
listing the files or folders.
So we know that for now we know that
the Alice program do a system called.
To the Colonel.
But what part of the kernel?
The File Manager?
Or sometimes we call it.
File system.
We know that this LS this program
does the system called to this part
of this how this part of the system?
The kernel provides the list of files.
We discussed it after the reading.
That's actually this is a topic
that we have to discover.
Yeah, how the files are managed
inside the hard disk drive,
how the File Manager retrieve
the list of files and folders?
It's a topic that we discussed when we
discussed this specific part of the Canon.
Now we just covered the shell
and gradually moved forward.
The more important part of the
operating system, which is the kernel. Yep.
So another question is that you may ask me.
So what are the complete list of commands?
What are the complete list of
these questions and commands?
So before I send this question,
you have to say.
The shelf on what OS?
Because we know that during the history.
We didn't.
We don't have only Unix and its shell.
We have different version of the unit.
They could change the kernel
of the operating system.
Also they could change the shell
part of the operating system,
so you have to ask answer
this question first.
What operating system you're talking,
and then you discuss about
the shell of that operating,
know that commands of that shell.
So now I put a question for you.
So there's the, uh,
let me open the pool,
so please go to this link.
I hope I couldn't put the wrong
link this time.
So please go to this link.
I put it in the chat box and.
Yeah. So. If you want to learn
the commands of a shell.
You have to spend time.
You have to learn these commands.
What operating system you
invest your time to know,
the commands of its shell?
Are you investing your time and you put
a lot of effort to know the commands of
the shell provided by the original Unix?
Or Linux. Post six posts.
As we said, it's not an operating system,
it's just under standard. Windows.
Mac operating system, none of them.
Basically, whenever you are
working with an operating system,
you need a command you don't
know the command,
you just simply Google that command.
Or you have enough time you learn
all the commands for the shells of
all these operating systems.
Oh for now, just have your own personal
opinion and then I'll explain which one.
I mean. You can have my suggestion. Yeah.
So we have 46 votes. We have 73 students,
so we need about 30 more votes. Guys wake up.
Yeah, we have to find a way to wake
them up. I mean I don't know how.
So.
Monica, that's a good 'cause.
She just. So I cannot scream so.
One way is that one of you can enable the
mic and then scream and then suddenly.
Suddenly others want to know
what happened and then wake up.
So that's a CD answer,
and then I can explain to you.
So basically there is no
true answer to this question.
I just put this question to having a.
Uh, I mean discussion about
the operating systems.
So basically most of you
put a method of seven units.
Basically, uh,
if you want to invest time to know the
commands of the shell for the original Unix.
It's a good investment,
but be careful because Unix
is an old operating system.
Uh, there are very modern versions
of the operating system that have
additional commands and actually
for the support of current demand.
So basically if you just stick to the
commands of Unix is not a good investment,
although it's good to know the command,
but you need to know more commands.
This is just a minimal set of commands.
Linux is a good investment because we
know that I mean this version of the.
Unix are kind of Unix like operating system.
It's a wider spread and most of
the operating system right now in
all around the world is the Linux
or the version of the Linux.
So it's a good investment to know the
commands of the shell provided by the Linux.
Windows I can see.
I mean lesson are agree I won't
invest my time to learn the commands
of the shell provided by the
windows because it's not.
And that it's first of all,
it's not open source.
Operating system second of all,
it's not that widespread
compared to the Linux.
All of them.
So probably you won't find enough time to
cover the command of all operating system,
so you can try it, but you definitely have.
You'll see short of time.
A post 6.
Post said good investment
because it's a standard.
As long as you know this standard
you and you learn the commands of the
shell provided by the process standard,
you are pretty more pretty more
sure that if you put the command
on any standard operating system,
you will see the same result.
So it's a good investment because
you know this standard,
and at least you know that.
What are the commands that all the
operating system should implement
in order to become a standard.
System. Posts are good investment.
Linux is a good investment.
One thing is that I personally
this one Google them.
It's a good approach because I mean in
practice you may found encounter facing a,
I mean a new version of the operating
system and then you want to know what is
this command in this operating system.
Google is a good approach.
Personally I know most of the
commands by Googling so you may
forget about the command.
Because you may switch from Windows
to Linux and then move to the Mac
OS or different operating system.
So you may forget about the specific
commands or Google is a good approach.
Also Mac OS. I would recommend Mac
OS over the windows because in North
America Mac OS is wide more widely
spread compared to the windows.
But yeah, this is not.
There is no true answer to this question,
but my suggestion would
be the Linux and process.
Also, Mac, as long as you're
living in the North America.
Uh, yeah. So.
The Javier says our post
is not always correct.
Yes, plastic is not an OS,
but it's a standard.
Because it proves at least it's a explain.
What are these standard commands that
an operating system must implement
so as long as you know the standard,
you know how to work with the
standard operating system, yeah?
Ha ha, good question.
I saw actually, uh, my status much old,
so that's a good. That's a good,
uh, I mean question, I thought,
uh yeah, I success that based on
what you are saying that Mac or is
is more widespread than Windows.
This is my personal insight.
So true, so don't quote me on that.
So go and.
Google it and see what are the
distribution of Windows users
compared to the Mac users and
based on this distribution you
can decide whether you invest
your time on Windows or Mac OS.
Sorry about that.
Don't quote me on that,
but that was my personal insight.
Ah. True Nicholas, yes,
true PowerShell is the,
but The thing is that I mean, uh.
Again, I mean, uh.
I leave it to you because I don't have.
I mean update uh, stats on this.
I mean the users of these
operating system, but uh.
It's a research topic for you guys.
You can discuss this in the
discussion board and then at least
we know whether the distribution
of the operating system around
the world and then yeah.
Oh great, actually.
I said put it link on the chat box and
basically says Mac is not more popular.
What is a good research topic?
I just basically I put this question
just to raise this challenge that if you
want to invest on an operating system,
what would be that operating system?
So. But in terms of Academy,
I mean kind of academic location.
So we gonna focus on post 6.
Because as we said,
we are going to introduce a
standard operating system and
any standard operating system.
We already said that the process
tried to standardize the shell.
Also, we are looking for we're looking for
is standard on the commands of the shell.
So if you go to this URL,
it provides the standard specification
of a shell for any operating system
which is going to be standardized.
So let me show you this.
Page so here basically it says that,
uh, what are these?
As we said, is not an operating system,
is not implementing any options,
it's just a standard.
It says that, for instance,
any standard shell must support
these instructions and etc.
So it's a long document you
can read about it and etc.
Weather the reserve wars and etc.
But the list of commands.
I'm going to show you.
So let's. Yes, I mean these are the list
of commands that I mean uh is standardized.
In the process, we can see these CD,
I mean change directory or kill
or others, for instance PWD,
which basically means that the path
of the working directory and etc.
But if you are looking for the
C lines or opcode of these,
there is no such a thing.
Impulses basically for success that.
You if you want to have a
standard operating system.
If you want to release a
standard operating system,
the shell must have these commands.
OK, so.
So these are just a few a.
I mean there are lots more,
but these are the few important ones.
List just to know that what is the
history behind this command is.
Originally was in the Multics,
you remember them Multics,
operating system.
It was before the Unix for
that operating system.
This command actually were written
to just list the files and
folders and all computer system.
You see how old this command it?
Also change directory concatenation,
kill echo and exit and attach.
So.
As you said,
the postfix doesn't have any C code
assembly lines or awkward for this command.
This is just the standard.
So however, following this standard,
the programmers of the system level
programmers to write the standard
shell for an operating system.
They start implementing this standard.
Actually,
the first shell of the operating
system was for the Unix.
It was long before the process because
possible standard after the Unix war.
Before we have the units only, so.
SH or Shell is Aboriginal
shell provided by born.
Now you see why we put that movie here.
It was proposed it was written by the Steve.
Ah, I mean born.
For the original Unix.
And then gradually within the history,
the other programmers they
tried to add more commands,
make it more efficient
and more cool features.
And the most modern version of the shell is.
The bash will look at it shortly
and you can see all of these.
Or rooted or versions or
revisions of the main Unix shell.
Because of that,
the post standard select this shell,
the original Unix shell as
the standard on the standard.
Basically,
the commands available in this
shell becomes the standard
commands supported by all the
standard operating system.
So you see here all the versions
of operating system have this
shell as a standard shop.
So if you know they stand shell
or if you know the shell commands
of the original Unix,
so then all these commands can
be used in other operating system
because it's a standard shell.
These are different versions of,
so this is the C shell.
The commands are very close
to this C program syntax.
Korn Shell and etc.
So an interesting question would be this.
Is it able for an operating
system to have multiple shells?
For instance, you go to the market and
buy a Mac OS or buy a Linux version.
Or you can have it for free.
Is it possible to have,
for instance, two or three different
versions of a shell on a Linux?
Or if you need, for instance,
to add a new shell,
is it possible to install a new
shell on existing operating system?
So before answering this question we
have to answer these two questions.
Do you mean having multiple
shares as programs or as process?
So what would be your answer?
So. The thing is. Uh.
I'll wait for others. So. Guys.
Is it possible to have multiple
shells on a single operating system?
As a program or as a process.
Yes, for sure you have one
shell because we said,
I mean any operating system,
neither shell to help programmer
to put bootstrap their program.
But more than one.
So let's see the answer.
First timers as a program
shell is a normal program.
It is already compiled in opcodes,
so for sure you can have multiple
program files off a share.
I mean multiple shells.
So the answer is yes,
you can have the program of the asset shell.
You can have the program
file off the this dash L.
You can have the program
files of the seashell and etc.
So basically if you don't have it,
you can download it so you can for sure.
Having multiple programs of the different
shells on a single operating system,
like other programs in a computer system,
you may have multiple programs.
There is no different thing about the shells,
but they mean.
Concern is as a process,
meaning that all of these shells are
running at the same time in their memory.
So far we can say no because at anytime
in the computer system only one shell
is responsible to put the strap
your program or provide response to
questions and do a system called the kernel.
Later, we'll see that it is possible
to have multiple shell running.
As a process at the same time,
how will discuss after the reading?
So for now,
we can say that we can have
multiple shells as a program,
but at any time for the convenience system
we can have only one shell as a process.
So. What are the list of available shells
as a program inside an operating system?
In any Unix like or Unix
based operating system,
there is a file at this path.
At the root path in this folder etc.
And this is the name of the file.
You can see the content of this file
to see what are the available shell
programs in your operating system.
But as a program.
So if you put VR you already know VIVI
is a text editor to show the content,
or you can adjust the content
of the text file.
So if UVI the content of this file in the
Unix type or Unix based operating system,
you can see the list of available shells.
So this is the standard shell.
This is the dash L as you can see here,
different versions of DASH or bash.
Personally I use T marks a lot in my work,
but this this is a kind of advanced
type of shell and you can see these
are different versions of the.
Original.
A Unix shell, they may drop some command.
They may add some commands,
but in order to become a standard.
All of them should provide an
implementation for posts shell,
which is the original direction.
So the next question is.
So now that we know that these
are the available shells as a
program inside an operating system,
which one is the default one when you
are connecting to the computer system
and you are dealing with the shell,
which shell you are dealing
with or interacting with.
This shot is called the default
shell or login shell, and it depends
on the information at this file.
Any user of a computer system
has information in this file.
One of the part of this information is
what Shell is assigned to that user.
So basically, as Hossein,
if you log into the USA unique space
or Unix like operating system,
this file shows that which of
these shells should be assigned
to this specific user and become
active and become a process.
So if you see the content of this file,
so we are again.
This file is CD content
basically says that for the root
folder of the computer system,
this is the login or default shell.
For other users you can see that there are.
Something like this which is not
listed in the available shells.
So I leave it for you as a
question to research about that.
What is this and why there is no
standard shell assigned to this user?
These are the users that can deal with
the kernel of the computer system,
but there is no shell
assigned to them. Why is that?
And if you look through this file,
you have to find your username in computer.
I mean in the system available
in the school or myself answers,
my username is HF and I so I have to
find somewhere between these lines that
it should assign a shell to my user.
Again, if you you can do it, uh,
at your home connected to the school
server or at your lab, you can do it,
but if you try to find your username,
you cannot find it.
There is another reason.
Ideally it, despite should contain
all the users of the computer system,
but some of them are missed.
It they are not in this file. Again,
I leave it as a research topic for you.
Why this file doesn't contain?
Uh, all the users of the computer system?
Just some of them.
But anyway,
the main purpose of this file is
that whenever this user connects
to the computer system,
this shell becomes a process
or active for that user.
So. Now that you know.
Where you can see what type of
shell is assigned to what user,
assuming that you connect to the
computer system and you don't
have access to this file or you
cannot find your username to see
what shell is assigned to you.
So there is a a command for any
shell echo as you remember,
is one of the standard command
provided by the post fixture.
So basically meaning that any
shell should have this command.
So if you run this command
followed by dollar sign zero,
it provides the name of your login
share or your core and shell.
So basically in the in any shell you
don't know what type of shell is this.
Whether it is a.
Original shell or whether it is a
bash shell or whether it is a seashell.
You don't know which one is this you
have to Simply put echo $0.00 sign zero.
It provides the name of the shell is.
Basically this is the shell that
you are right now connecting to.
As I said at anytime for now only one
shell gonna be activated or become a
process available at your service.
Ah, we have some question here.
All I success, but you can
have multiple kenhorst.
Yes, as I said, I mean a little
will see that we can have multiple
a shell available at the same time
as a process will discuss it later.
Uh. Alexis says the only reason
I said programs work because he.
So our only says T Max is
a shell or shell manager.
Uh, for now we can call that Emacs or
screen as an advanced type of shell.
Uh, we are not going to go to details
of this type of shell later, uh.
But Shell manager I won't call it
a shell manager. It's a kind of.
A advanced shell we can say yeah,
because it provides multiple access to the
Colonel. So we can say advanced shell.
I won't call it the shell managing.
Uh. OK. So one thing is that.
Is it possible to change the shell?
For instance,
currently you have activated bash shell.
Now you want to switch to another shell,
for instance the original shell or you
want to switch to that advanced shell,
for instance T marks.
Or you want you want to come back to the.
Original share or you want to come back
to the bass shop so at any time is it
possible to change the activated shell?
The answer is yes.
You have to simply run the
program or opcode of that shell.
So basically you have to ask the current
shell to run the opcode up the next shell.
So here is the way we do that.
So basically we already are in the batch,
so this is the bash shell.
We asked the bash shell to
activate the original shell.
You have to simply write the name
of that shell and even depressed.
They enter the bash shell.
Buddhist wraps the original shell into
the memory and becomes the activated shell.
So this is the bash shell.
Sorry this is the original shaft and
if you want to see the name you have
to simply just echo dollar zero.
As we said, this is the standard command,
so this goes to the asset shell and then
the SHL actually provides its name for you.
Right now, whatever I put in front of
this command prompt or command line,
it is going to be bootstrapped or it is
going to be a answered by this shell.
How to exit the current shell and
go back to the previous one?
You have to Simply put this command.
This is a standard command by posted shell.
So basically we were at the.
Original shell.
You have to simply ask the original
shell exit and basically you come
back today or at the first shell,
which was the bandshell.
And what happens if you write exit here?
Basically, this is the current shell.
What happens, you ask this question,
which is the bandshell except. Anybody?
So basically we have the bash shell.
We moved to the new Shell,
original shell and then we did except so.
We came back to the original batch.
Now we want to do exit from
the batch, what happens?
Guys wake up.
So Ernie says that it terminates the shell.
A behavior says it returns to the kernel.
Anybody else?
I saw it says that I feel like it
just closes. They can't host. OK, so.
We have 3 answers out of 70 students.
It breaks your PC. Definitely no,
because breaking the PC I
mean physically means that.
These are all programs they
cannot harm physically.
Uh, it may crash your kernel.
One thing it may be bad.
Uh, Alex is rest in peace. PC closed.
One thing actually is that I mean normally
when you exit the shell it closes the shell.
Basically it stops.
It brings the process of the
shell out of the memory,
meaning that it kills the shell.
Or in another word, it closes the shell.
You're out of the shell,
meaning that the shell is not accessible
by you or the shell is out of memory.
So at any time the user log into the computer
system in new shell gonna be become a
process for that user inside the memory.
When you exit your I mean
terminal or your shell.
Basically it kills that shell
for you and then remove the
process out of the network.
So we can say that it closes the shell
for you or ends this shell for you.
So one question would be this.
What if the commands that you type in
in front of the shell is exactly the
same as the name of your programs?
For instance, you already write
a hello program in the lab 02.
You're going to write another
program in the lab.
03 this week, which is called Mag.
What if you write a program and by
accident the name of your program is
exactly the same name of the command
or built in command of the Shell?
Which one actually?
The shell is going to run for you?
Its own built-in schematic,
or your program would
describe your program.
So Monica says command Nix has command.
So as you can see most obvious as
command and basically there is a
way to distinguish between them.
So imagine that you write a program
called Echo and we already know that
there is a command in building shell
ECHO in order to distinguish them.
As you said, as you correctly said, the with.
Ideally, the shell looks at its own
built-in command first and then basically
when you put this it says this is a
built in command and it tries to do
the normal ECHO command. However,
so it doesn't bootstrap your program.
If you want to specifically tell the
shell to run your program, you have to
say where is actually your program.
So by putting this dot basically
means that the current folder.
So this is means that it described folder.
This program 5.
Then the shell understands that
you mean the program,
not the built in command.
You probably face this problem in your
lab 02 because personally I fixed it.
I usually forget to put this
current folder icon here,
so then I receive command is not available.
Something like that.
So basically in front of the command shell,
if you just put hello,
it raises an error because it says that
it assumes that it's a command prompt.
It's a built in command and it doesn't
find this command and raise an error.
You have to tell that.
Note this is my program and then
run your program.
Another interesting question is
that by knowing how to distinguish
between your program and the
built in command of the Shell.
You already used the C compiler CC in
your lab. Also, in this week's lab.
So in these lab all the next
labs you are going to use this C
compiler to build your programs.
When you in front of the command
line when you say for instance CC
the name of your program and etc.
This is a builtin commands or.
This is a program.
Anybody? So you don't put dot forward
slash 0CC so it's not your program.
Any answer?
Monica says that this is a
built in a command in a shell.
Michelle says yes, it is.
So behavior says it is a
builtin command. Anybody else?
So most of you says it's a
built in command and, uh,
in the next few slides you'll
see what is the true answer.
But what based on what we discussed so far?
This is not a program that we write.
So by the way we put the command here,
it's a builtin command.
Later Will see the correct answer.
I want answers right now. But most
of you says it's a builtin command.
So. Now, the next important
question would be this the shell.
Provides a command just to simply print out
all the commands available at the Shell.
So is there any builtin command?
Or built in program inside the shell that
basically just lists all the commands.
So how my answer would
be this good suggestion?
You can ask the post standard
to add such a command,
however so far this command is not
part of the process standard shell.
So there is no such a command.
There might be some command in
the new versions of the Shell.
For instance in bash.
You may have such a command,
but this is not part of the standard chat,
it's an additional command provided
by the new versions of the Shell.
So I leave it to you guys to search
about whether such a command exists in
new versions of these shells or no,
and if it exists, what are the?
What is the command?
But I would say it exists for
the new version of the shell,
but it depends on the versions
of the Schama shell.
Bash had its own command,
the Princess ZHZ Shell has its own
command to list all the available
commands in the shell and attached.
But as I said,
this is not in a standard
by the process shell,
so you won't expect the original Unix
shell has such a command to this.
All the available commands.
So I would say Google please.
And one important thing from you is this.
In this course you are taking this course
to know all these commands on a Unix
life or Unix based operating system.
So you would ask me.
Should I memorize all these commands?
My answer would be not all of them,
but the important ones.
And then you may ask me
what are the important ones?
Because you think that you have to
know them in order to pass the course.
But my answer would be I don't know.
It depends on your application.
Sometimes I'm some commands are much
more important than the others,
so my answer would be.
Have Internet access and Google
about the commands out.
Exams are all open book so we can
simply use the Google to find the
commands for a shell and all the
different options of that command.
And you would say that yeah,
Google is a friend.
But I would suggest you not to
rely 100% on Google because it's
not a good friend.
So yeah,
that's my answer,
so I'm not going to explain details of
these commands of different shells.
I leave it to you and the Google,
so at any point in time if you need
to know more about the command or if
you think there should be some command,
simply Google about that.
However. If you want to work with the shell,
which shell is the best one among
all these new versions of the shell
that provides the standard POSIX
shell and also additional commands,
which one is the best?
So in order to answer this question,
you have to first look at these, uh?
Questions.
It depends on your definition of the best.
If it has a lot of commands but it is slow,
you consider it as the best.
Shell if it has few commands,
but very fast you prefer this type of shell.
If the shell has cool features,
what I mean by cool features is that,
for instance, it it has,
you can use the up and down
arrow keys in order to scroll
to the previous commands or etc.
So these are cool or
whether it is has a color.
Because black and white
is very monotonous shell,
so you prefer to have a colorful shell,
green, blue, something like that.
Then you can consider that
child is a good child.
Or sometimes you prefer a shell to
have a graphical user interface.
For instance, Windows and Mac OS.
They provide.
A shell with graphical interface,
so you may say that a shell is
a good shell or best shell for
me if it has a graphical.
For instance, it has a windows,
it has minimized maximized clothes and etc.
So you prefer not to work
with the command prompt.
You prefer to work with
the graphical interface.
So based on your preference,
you choose the your own best shell.
12 of them are very important for you
to know at least the history of that.
The original Unix shell.
As I said, it is written by the
staff and Richard or Steve Bourne.
At Bell Labs original Unix,
the first and the post six chose this shell.
The commands of this shell as a standard.
Based on my experience,
the most convenient this is
again personal experience.
The most convenient shell is the bash shell,
written by the Brian Fox.
It is called born again.
It's a kind of pawn name born again,
meaning that in new version or a
reborn of the shell or the reborn
of the Born stillborn shell.
So you see, I mean kind of synchronization
for two different semantics.
Pony can shell or bash Shell
is part of ignored project,
meaning that you can simply download
the source code of the bash shell and
change it or see what are the sea
lines of the shell for this shell.
And. Because of this,
I mean cool features and very
fast features of this shell.
It becomes the canonical or widespread
shell on most of the operating systems.
Most of the Linux distribution has the
bash as at least the default or login share,
or an alternative won the Mac
OS operating system had this as
the default shell before 2019,
but after 2019 they moved to the seashell.
But they still have the bash as an
alternative. At any Mac OS you can.
Activate or enable the bash shell at animal.
Any moments in time.
So I just wanted to show you
the codes of the.
A bash shell so you can
download it at that link.
So this is the latest version 5.1.
So this is the old DC
lines of the bash shell.
But the important product is the bill sense.
So if you want to see what are the C
programs of these built-in commands,
for instance, the list LS,
CD, Change directory and etc,
we can go to this folder.
So and then let's find the LS LS.
This is the kill.
Where is where is the LSLS?
Can you find this is the echo?
LL.
Let's
I cannot find LS with the LS.
Is it the city?
Anyways, ah, you can explore his code
lines and see what are the code lines
for the building commands of bash shell
and you can change it and you can you
release your own shell for instance.
For signs shell, which is a new
versions of Bash Shell and then ask
Mac OS or Linux to distribute your
shell as a new version of the Shell.
Or you can put it on the Internet.
Everybody can download your shell
and add the shell in their system.
OK, so.
An important part of the shell,
not just the built in commands,
is the variable, not only the shell,
but also the kernel.
So we started with answering some questions
and those questions become programs and
becomes built-in commands in the shell.
However, there are sometimes
that the questions. Or FAQ.
And they have a fixed set of answers.
So it's kind of a fake use on websites,
so these questions not commands that
the answers are already provided.
They are already a memory
in terms of key value,
so a key is the question and value
is the answer to that question.
So because these are frequently
asked question,
there isn't no program as it
built into the shell or as a you
have to write a program for that.
Basically they are already
provided by as as the variables.
You have to simply ask for the key
and it returns the value or the
answer for that key or question.
So it's a set of fixed question answers.
Uh, there are two types of
variables in a computer system
as part of the operating system.
Uh, the first part is the system variables.
When we say system for variable,
it's also known as environment variables.
It also global variables,
Unix variables. But honestly,
based on what we covered so far,
this can be called kennel variables,
meaning that these key value pairs.
Or maintained by the kernel.
Kernel knows the keys.
Colonel knows the answer,
and in order to know the answer
of these keys you have to do a
system called to see the value
of that key or that question.
These are variables in order to
make a difference between these
variables provided by the kernel
and other variables provided by
the shell or other parts of the
system is usually in upper case.
So they are all uppercase,
and if you want to see the
answer to these variables,
you have to simply use the
command ECHO dollar sign.
The name of the key.
So basically you asked the shell.
To do a system call to the kernel
and the kernel provides the value
of the key that you want to know.
So these are different.
I mean there are huge amounts of of
kernel variables or system variables.
These are just some samples.
For instance, if you want to
know what is the name of.
Kernels, OS.
Uh, so basically you say you ask
the this is the bash shell you ask
the batch shell by the equal to do
a system called to the kernel and
ask for the name of for this key.
And this kernel provides the
answer to the shell,
and the shell gives you the answer.
Also, you can ask the Colonel
who is the correct user.
You have to ask it by the echo through
the shell to provide the answer.
But Colonel.
There are some system variables
available at the kernel that there is
no answer for that we call them unset
or there are no set answer for that.
Uh, if you want to see the current shell,
you can ask the kernel to give
the name of the core and shell.
The important one is this one.
The path. Basically, path provides the shell.
And the Colonel. Additional search space,
meaning that originally whatever you
put in front of the shell, either it
is in the current folder, for instance,
your program in the correct folder.
Or it is a builtin command inside the shell?
Is it possible to expand this search space?
The answer is yes, provided by the path.
The PATH system variable actually
has a content. These contents.
These are the.
Different folders available
in your computer system.
Separated by column.
What it means is that now that
the shell wants to look up
for a command or a program.
Not only it looks up its
own built-in commands,
not only it looks off the current folder,
but also it looks off these
folders to find the program
that you put the name here.
So path is a important system variable.
It contains the list of
directories separated by column.
Basically it provides new
additional search space to the
shell to find a particular program.
So. For instance,
if you want to compile your program,
you need a C compiler.
C compiler is a program.
So you have to go and find the system.
The C compiler at that and
you have to find the program
file of the C compiler.
In any Unix space or Unix
like operating system,
the C compiler is in this folder.
So then you have to go change
the directory to this folder.
Now you have the.
Program file of the C compiler.
So you put current folder because
the current folder is this.
A user system resource bin binary file
and then you compile your program.
However you raise this error,
you see this error? Why?
Because at this folder
you don't have your file.
So you have two options.
Other you either you copy
your program into this folder.
In order to be distinguished
by the C compiler.
I you won't see the error of the C
compiler or you copy the C compiler
and bring it to your own directory.
Actually, if you try these two options,
none of them will work for you.
So the only available option is that try to
include the program files at this folder.
To the search space of the shell.
So basically if you go back to the Koran
folder in your folder home folder and you
see the content of the past system variable,
one of the directory that is added is.
User system resource forward slash binary.
It means that all the program files
at this location is already added
to the search space of the shell.
So you don't need to copy the program files
in that folder into your current folder.
You have to simply use it.
So when you put this name of the program
in front of the shell shell first looks up
its internal command builds on command.
If it's not matched with any of them,
it goes to the past system folder.
And it looks for the program
files inside these folders.
All these locations,
if it doesn't match with any program
for us inside this directory,
then it looks up to the correct folder.
If it doesn't match with any of the programs,
it returns an error.
So now you're able to Simply
put the compiler of the C here.
And because it's in this folder,
it matched with the program file in
this folder and it doesn't raise the
error and it compiles your program.
So the answer to my previous
question is that CC is a program.
Now they built in command,
but you can run it without
specifying the path of this program
because the pass is already added
to the system variable path.
So I'm pretty much done with today's lecture.
The only last slide is this.
Is it possible to change the?
Value of system variables which is
provided by the system, but the kernel.
The answer is yes. It is possible to
remove the answer of the key dances.
Yes, make it on set.
Is it possible to add in new
key value pair to the kernel?
The answer is yes.
Is it possible to persist the challenge,
meaning that?
Because all these changes are
valid as long as the computer
is running and has the power.
If you turn off the computer,
then everything is outside the memory,
so the memory is become zero.
All the locations of the American Zero.
So all these modification
or new key values is gone.
So is it possible to resist the change
as a part of the kernel whenever the
kennel put this taps into the memory?
The answer is yes.
How?
It depends on the shell,
because all of these asking the
answer of the key value or changing
the key value for the character
is going to be done through the
shell and it depends on the shelf.
I leave it for you to Google about
that and know how to add a new keeper,
how to change the value of the
system variable and attach.
So I'm done with today's lecture next week.
We are going to continue with
the remaining part of the batch,
which is just only. Two or four,
I mean two or three more slides.
And then, uh. We start the kernel
part of the operating system.
OK, we have some thank you guys.
Have a great day.
Take care so we have some question.
Victor ask Willie change even persist
if you close the shell in some cases.
Oh, that's a good question, actually.
Uh, it depends on the type of variable,
whether it's a system variable,
part of the kernel or it is part
of other type of variables that
I'm going to discuss next week.
It depends on the thing.
The only thing I can say is that it
is possible to persist the change
even after you log out of the system,
even if after you turn off the
system and you turn on the system,
you can see that your change or your
new key value pair is available.
Yeah. But again,
you have to search on Google.
I'm not going to cover it,
but the answer is yes.
Any other questions? By the way,
I'm going to be in the office,
so any question I'm available
for you at the office.
And, uh, that's it.
Have a great day guys.
Thanks for farm.
Thank you victor.
Have a great day.
Thank you dear one. Have a great day.
I ranesh you too. Thank you.
Have a great day. So I'm going to.
Stop the recording.